.TH GNUTRITION 1 "September 2026" "GNUtrition 0.1" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
GNUtrition \- nutrition tracking with USDA food data
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B gnutrition
.RI [ OPTION ]...
.SH DESCRIPTION
GNUtrition is a nutrition tracker that uses USDA food data stored in a
local SQLite database. With no options, it starts an interactive ncurses
interface. Command-line options allow searching foods, showing nutrient
information, and logging daily intake.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \\-search =\, QUERY "," \-s " " QUERY
Search for foods matching QUERY.
.TP
.BR \\-info =\, CODE "," \-i " " CODE
Show nutrient information for the specified food code.
.TP
.BR \\-log =\, CODE "," \-l " " CODE
Log the specified food code for the selected date.
.TP
.BR \\-quantity =\, NUM "," \-n " " NUM
Number of servings to log (default: 1.0). Used with
.BR \-l .
.TP
.BR \\-budget "," \-b
Show today's food-group budget summary.
.TP
.BR \\-calories =\, KCAL "," \-c " " KCAL
Set the daily calorie target (default: 2000).
.TP
.BR \\-age =\, YEARS "," \-a " " YEARS
Provide age in years for calorie estimation.
.TP
.BR \\-height =\, CM "," \-H " " CM
Provide height in centimeters for calorie estimation.
.TP
.BR \\-weight =\, KG "," \-w " " KG
Provide weight in kilograms for calorie estimation.
.TP
.BR \\-activity =\, LEVEL "," \-A " " LEVEL
Set activity level: sedentary, light, moderate, very-active, or extra-active.
.TP
.BR \\-date =\, DATE "," \-d " " DATE
Set the log/budget date (default: today).
.TP
.BR \\-db =\, PATH "," \-D " " PATH
Set the path to the USDA food database (default: food.db).
.TP
.BR \\-profile-db =\, PATH "," \-P " " PATH
Set the path to the profile/log database.
.TP
.BR \\-help "," \-h
Display help and exit.
.TP
.BR \\-version "," \-V
Output version information and exit.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I food.db
USDA food database built by build_db.sh.
.TP
.I $XDG_DATA_HOME/gnutrition/log.db
Per-user profile and log database.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Search for foods containing "oat":
.B gnutrition \-\-search="oat"
.TP
Show nutrient details for food code 123456:
.B gnutrition \-\-info=123456
.TP
Log a food for a specific date:
.B gnutrition \-\-log=123456 \-\-date=01/15/2026
.TP
Log 2.5 servings of a food:
.B gnutrition \-\-log=123456 \-\-quantity=2.5
.SH INTERACTIVE MODE
When started with no command-line options, GNUtrition opens an ncurses
interface. The main screen shows the daily food-group budget. Press:
.TP
.B s
Search for foods. Use Up/Down to select a result and Enter to view its
nutrient details. From the detail screen, press Tab to edit servings and
date, then
.B l
to log the food.
.TP
.B l
View the food log. Use Left/Right arrows to navigate between dates that
have logged entries.
.TP
.B p
Edit your profile (age, height, weight, activity level).
.TP
.B q
Quit.
.SH REPORTING BUGS
Report bugs to bug-gnutrition@gnu.org.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2026 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
License GPLv3+: GNU GPL version 3 or later <https://gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html>.
This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.
There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR sqlite3 (1)
