\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@comment %**start of header
@include version.texi
@settitle GNUtrition @value{VERSION}
@syncodeindex pg cp
@comment %**end of header
@copying
This manual is for GNUtrition (version @value{VERSION},
@value{UPDATED}), which is an example in the Texinfo documentation.

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections, with no Front-Cover Texts, and with no Back-Cover
Texts.  A copy of the license is included in the section entitled
``GNU Free Documentation License''.
@end quotation
@end copying

@dircategory Texinfo documentation system
@direntry
* sample: (sample)Invoking sample.
@end direntry

@titlepage
@title GNUtrition
@subtitle for version @value{VERSION}, @value{UPDATED}
@author Anton McClure @email{asm@@gnu.org,<asm@@gnu.org>}
@author Ian Haywood
@author Edgar Denny
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@contents

@node Top
@top GNUtrition

This manual is for GNUtrition (version @value{VERSION},
@value{UPDATED}).

Copyright (C) 2001 Ian Haywood

Copyright (C) 2010, 2024 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections no Front-Cover Texts, and with no Back-Cover Texts.

A copy of the license is included in the section entitled "GNU Free
Documentation License".

This manual is derived from the manual for GNUtrition 0.32.0 and older
by Ian Haywood and Edgar Denny.

@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction

GNUtrition is a program designed to produce a detailed nutritional
analysis of the human diet.

@node Downloading GNUtrition
@section Downloading GNUtrition

GNUtrition can be found on the main GNU ftp server:
@url{http://ftp.gnu.org/gnu/gnutrition/} (via HTTP/HTTPS) and
@url{ftp://ftp.gnu.org/gnu/gnutrition/} (via FTP). It can also be
found on the @url{http://www.gnu.org/prep/ftp.html,GNU mirrors};
please @url{http://ftpmirror.gnu.org/gnutrition/,use a mirror} if
possible.

@node Requirements
@subsection Requirements

GNUtrition requires the Python Scripting Language, GNOME Environment,
Python-to-GNOME libraries (pygnome, pygtk) and SQLite Database server.
Starting with version 0.32.0, MySQL was no longer used.

@node Running GNUtrition for the First Time
@section Running GNUtrition for the First Time

You may start GNUtrition from the command line with:

@smallexample
@group
$ gnutrition
@end group
@end smallexample

@node Installing the Database
@subsection Installing the Database

When GNUtrition starts for the first time, it will install its
nutrient database.  This may take a short time, due to the size of the
database.

@node Entering your Information
@subsection Entering your Information

Once that is done, it will then ask for some personal details for
calculating dietary requirements.  This information includes your age,
weight, and sex.  For females, this includes physiology such as
pregnant or lactating.

GNUtrition will then move to the main screen.

@node The Main Window
@chapter The Main Window

On the left hand side, three icons are visible for the three modes:

@b{Daily Record.} List of foods eaten in a day, to calculate total
intake.

@b{Recipe.} Views a particular recipe.

@b{Food.} Analyses a Single Food

@node The Single Food
@section The Single Food

The Single Food screen is good place to start. By clicking in the
``single banana'' icon, a screen asking for the food, amount, and
measurement unit is displayed.  From here, you can see the amount of
macronutrients, micronutrients, amino acids, fats, and other details
about the food.

This allows you to enter a particular food and receive a report about
its nutrient content.

@node Searching for a Food
@subsection Searching for a Food

GNUtrition can only analyse the foods present in its database. Press
the ``Search'' button, to show the search window asking for a food
group, and the food name text to match.  This search uses regular
expressions.

As the box shows, you may search by the text name or by the nutrient
content.

@node Search by Text
@subsubsection Search by Text

In this example, I searched by the word ``apple'' The database
produces dozens of options for this word, such as ``Babyfood, fruit,
applesauce, strained'', or ``Pie, apple, prepared from recipe'' This
are displayed in a tree format, with the first word forming the
header, the second the sub-header, etc. You must explore the tree to
find the one you what, cicking on the little pluses, explodes the
sub-hierarchy of foods. In this example I selected the food Apples >
raw > with skin, so the Selected Food box would read: ``Apples, raw,
with skin''.

@node Search by Nutrient Value
@subsubsection Search by Nutrient Value

In the ``Search'' window, ``Nutrient Search'' can be selected:.  This
asks for the food groups, to maximize/minimize nutrient composition
per various measurement units, the number of foods to list, along with
the nutrients to maximize and minimize.  Both the maximize and
minimize section asks for the name of the nutrient and constraints.

Foods are selected by their nutrient content. ``Content'' can be
assessed by grams (weight), or calories (energy).

You can maximise nutrients, selecting foods rich in those nutrients,
or minimise nutrients, selecting foods low in that nutrient.

The ``constraint'' refers to a weighting given to each nutrient in
computing its score. So nutrient with a constraint of 3 will be three
times as important in calculating the score, as one with a constraint
of 1.

The minimised nutrients have a negative constraint, as they subtract
from the score. The search gives the foods with the highest score by
this method.

The foods are displayed in a tree as for the ``Search by Name'' box.

@node Back to The Main Window
@subsection Back to The Main Window

When you have found the food you what, press the ``OK'' button, and
you will return to the main screen with your food selected.

You must first select the unit you are measuring in, in this case I
have selected "large" (i.e. large apple), and the amount, in this case
one.

Results are then shown for lots of nutrients. Different classes of
nutrients are selected by the tabs ``Macro-nutrients'', ``Minerals'',
etc. The percentage of RDI (recommended daily intake) is also
displayed for the nutrients based on your height and weight as entered
when you first ran the program.

To understand what all these mean, refer to the Nutrient Notes.

@node The Recipe
@section The Recipe

The Recipe screen is for entering a list of foods and their quantities.

The foods are entered as described above. After you have entered all the foods in the recipe, you can press on the ``Compute'' icon, a nutrient report for the whole recipe is produced, again similar in format to a single food.

Recipes can be saved to disk to form a collection of recipes, by pressing on the ``Save'' icon. make sure you give the recipe a name and a category. These saved recipes can be retrieved by typing in the name int the ``Recipe Name'' box and pressing Search.

@node Submitting a Recipe
@subsection Submitting a Recipe

Recipes can also be saved to a central repository at by clicking on
the ``Submit'' icon. I urge you to do this whenever you create a
recipe. This way, a reasonable collection of recipes can be included
with later versions of the program. Before you submit, you must click
through a copyright warning, to allow the recipes to be included in
future versions. Please do not submit copyrighted recipes!

@node The Daily Record
@section The Daily Record

For the seriously keen, you can enter in the computer every food you
eat at various times of the day, and GNUtrition will calculate the
total nutrient intake you have for that day.

As with the Recipe screen, multiple foods are entered, corresponding
to the time of day eaten, and a total recipe intake for the day is
calculated.

@node GNU Free Documentation License
@appendix GNU Free Documentation License

@include fdl.texi

@printindex cp

@bye
